Add a blog post to summarize the issue in 3.5 to 3.6 upgrade (#974)
etcd-io/website: content/en/blog/2025/upgrade_from_3.5_to_3.6_issue.md

---

> title: How to Prevent a Key Issue in the etcd 3.5 to 3.6 Upgrade - A Summary and Solution

Reviewer: Revised title suggestion:  Read Before Upgrading to Etcd v3.6.0
alternately:
Prevent a v3.6.0 Upgrade-Blocking Issue

... in order to get more people to read it.

Author: > Revised title suggestion: Read Before Upgrading to Etcd v3.6.0

This isn't a generic upgrade guide or checklist. It's specific for this issue.

> Prevent a v3.6.0 Upgrade-Blocking Issue

It also works, but I prefer to the suggestion provided by @spzala in https://github.com/etcd-io/website/pull/974#discussion_r2012842937

> title: How to Prevent a Key Issue in the etcd 3.5 to 3.6 Upgrade - A Summary and Solution

Reviewer: Yeah, that title works too.  Something else, regardless.

> title: How to Prevent a Key Issue in the etcd 3.5 to 3.6 Upgrade - A Summary and Solution

Author: > May be we want to rewrite the title not to confuse with etcd key?

Makes sense. Updated & thx

author:  "[Benjamin Wang](https://github.com/ahrtr), VMware by Broadcom"
date: 2025-03-27
draft: false
---

> There is a key issue [19557][] in the 3.5 to 3.6 upgrade that may cause the upgrade process to fail.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. Updated, high level followed the suggestion. PTAL

## TL; DR

Users are required to first upgrade to etcd v3.5.20 (or a higher patch version) before upgrading
to etcd v3.6.0. Failure to do so may result in an unsuccessful upgrade.

## What's the symptom?

When upgrading a multi-member etcd cluster from a version between v3.5.1 and v3.5.19 to v3.6.0,
the upgrade may fail due to the error "`membership: too many learner member in cluster`".

## What's the root cause?

By default, etcd allows at most one learner member; the bootstrap process will fail if there are
two or more learners. Due to the issue [19557][], some voting members may revert to learners when
upgrading to v3.6.0, which may cause the upgrade to fail.

> The root cause is that when promoting a learner, the change isn't correctly persisted in the v3store;

Author: Thanks, it makes sense. Updated, but I kept using singular `change` instead of plural `changes`, because it's just one change in the context.

> The root cause is that when promoting a learner, the change isn't correctly persisted in the v3store;

Reviewer 2: Sure, sounds good @ahrtr  Thank you!

instead, it's only persisted in the v2store. As a result, the membership data becomes inconsistent
between the v2store and v3store.

> In etcd 3.5, the v2store is the source of truth for the membership data, whereas in etcd 3.6,

Author: updated & thx

the v3store is the source of truth. It's exactly the reason why the issue only occurs when
upgrading from 3.5 to 3.6.

## Which versions are impacted?

The issue was introduced in etcd v3.5.1 via [13348][]. All etcd patch versions from v3.5.1 to
v3.5.19 are affected.

## Which versions contain the fix for this issue?

The issue was fixed in etcd v3.5.20 via [19563][]. **Therefore, users are required to first upgrade to
etcd v3.5.20 (or a higher patch version) before upgrading to etcd v3.6.0; otherwise, the
upgrade may fail.**

## What if users do not follow the guide?

What happens if users still upgrade directly from etcd v3.5.1-v3.5.19 to v3.6.0?

> If the etcd cluster isn't affected by the issue, so no members will revert to learners

Author: updated & thx

during the upgrade. In this case, the upgrade will succeed without any problems.

If the etcd cluster has already been affected by the issue, there are two possible outcomes:

- If two or more members revert to learners during the upgrade, the upgrade will fail. In that
  case, users will have to roll back and first upgrade to etcd v3.5.20 (or a higher version)
  before attempting to upgrade to v3.6.0 again.
- If only one member reverts to a learner during the upgrade, the upgrade will still succeed.
  However, the issue is that a voting member reverts to a learner, which may confuse users and
  also affect the cluster's quorum. We addressed this issue in etcd v3.6.0-rc.3 via [19636][]
  by automatically promoting the learner to a voting member during bootstrap.

## How did we prevent this from happening again?

etcd has some end-to-end(e2e) upgrade test cases, but did not detect this issue. Instead,

> it's discovered in Kubernetes' workflow test. To address this gap, we added a similar e2e

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it was discovered in Kubernetes' workflow test. To address this gap, we added a similar e2e
```

Author: updated & thx

etcd v3.5.20 (or a higher patch version) before upgrading to etcd v3.6.0; otherwise, the
upgrade may fail.**

## What if users do not follow the guide?

What happens if users still upgrade directly from etcd v3.5.1-v3.5.19 to v3.6.0?

If the etcd cluster isn't affected by the issue, no members will revert to learners
during the upgrade. In this case, the upgrade will succeed without any problems.

If the etcd cluster has already been affected by the issue, there are two possible outcomes:

- If two or more members revert to learners during the upgrade, the upgrade will fail. In that
  case, users will have to roll back and first upgrade to etcd v3.5.20 (or a higher version)
  before attempting to upgrade to v3.6.0 again.
- If only one member reverts to a learner during the upgrade, the upgrade will still succeed.
  However, the issue is that a voting member reverts to a learner, which may confuse users and
  also affect the cluster's quorum. We addressed this issue in etcd v3.6.0-rc.3 via [19636][]
  by automatically promoting the learner to a voting member during bootstrap.

## How did we prevent this from happening again?

> etcd has some end-to-end(e2e) upgrade test cases, but did not detect this issue. Instead,

Reviewer 3: nit:

```suggestion
etcd has some end-to-end (e2e) upgrade test cases, but did not detect this issue. Instead,
```

Author: updated & thx

> it was discovered in Kubernetes' workflow test. To address this gap, we added a similar e2e
> test via [19634][], which was also backported to release-3.6 via [19662][].

Reviewer 4: nit: 
```suggestion
it was discovered in Kubernetes' workflow test. To address this gap, we added a Kubernetes style upgrade e2e
test via [19634][], which was also backported to release-3.6 via [19662][].
```

Author: Let's try not to create new concept "`Kubernetes style upgrade`" to avoid any unnecessary confusion/questions, also avoid wordy explanation.

I used "`Kubeadm style upgrade`" in the description of https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/issues/19557. It's OK in that informal case, but suggest not for this formal (and to be widely broadcasted) blog.
